<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>I: The Change</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-2-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">The Change</p>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="chapter-2-1-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">I</h4>
				<p>I seemed to awaken out of a refreshing sleep.</p>
				<p>I did not awaken with a start, but opened my eyes, and lay very comfortably looking at a line of extraordinarily scarlet poppies that glowed against a glowing sky. It was the sky of a magnificent sunrise, and an archipelago of gold-beached purple islands floated in a sea of golden green. The poppies too, swan-necked buds, blazing corollas, translucent stout seed-vessels, stoutly upheld, had a luminous quality, seemed wrought only from some more solid kind of light.</p>
				<p>I stared unwonderingly at these things for a time, and then there rose upon my consciousness, intermingling with these, the bristling golden green heads of growing barley.</p>
				<p>A remote faint question, where I might be, drifted and vanished again in my mind. Everything was very still.</p>
				<p>Everything was as still as death.</p>
				<p>I felt very light, full of the sense of physical well-being. I perceived I was lying on my side in a little trampled space in a weedy, flowering barley field, that was in some inexplicable way saturated with light and beauty. I sat up, and remained for a long time filled with the delight and charm of the delicate little convolvulus that twined among the barley stems, the pimpernel that laced the ground below.</p>
				<p>Then that question returned. What was this place? How had I come to be sleeping here?</p>
				<p>I could not remember.</p>
				<p>It perplexed me that somehow my body felt strange to me. It was unfamiliar⁠—I could not tell how⁠—and the barley, and the beautiful weeds, and the slowly developing glory of the dawn behind; all those things partook of the same unfamiliarity. I felt as though I was a thing in some very luminous painted window, as though this dawn broke through me. I felt I was part of some exquisite picture painted in light and joy.</p>
				<p>A faint breeze bent and rustled the barley-heads, and jogged my mind forward.</p>
				<p>Who was I? That was a good way of beginning.</p>
				<p>I held up my left hand and arm before me, a grubby hand, a frayed cuff; but with a quality of painted unreality, transfigured as a beggar might have been by Botticelli. I looked for a time steadfastly at a beautiful pearl sleeve-link.</p>
				<p>I remembered Willie Leadford, who had owned that arm and hand, as though he had been someone else.</p>
				<p>Of course! My history⁠—its rough outline rather than the immediate past⁠—began to shape itself in my memory, very small, very bright and inaccessible, like a thing watched through a microscope. Clayton and Swathinglea returned to my mind; the slums and darkness, Dureresque, minute and in their rich dark colors pleasing, and through them I went towards my destiny. I sat hands on knees recalling that queer passionate career that had ended with my futile shot into the growing darkness of the End. The thought of that shot awoke my emotions again.</p>
				<p>There was something in it now, something absurd, that made me smile pityingly.</p>
				<p>Poor little angry, miserable creature! Poor little angry, miserable world!</p>
				<p>I sighed for pity, not only pity for myself, but for all the hot hearts, the tormented brains, the straining, striving things of hope and pain, who had found their peace at last beneath the pouring mist and suffocation of the comet. Because certainly that world was over and done. They were all so weak and unhappy, and I was now so strong and so serene. For I felt sure I was dead; no one living could have this perfect assurance of good, this strong and confident peace. I had made an end of the fever called living. I was dead, and it was all right, and these⁠—?</p>
				<p>I felt an inconsistency.</p>
				<p>These, then, must be the barley fields of God!⁠—the still and silent barley fields of God, full of unfading poppy flowers whose seeds bear peace.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-2-1-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">II</h4>
				<p>It was queer to find barley fields in heaven, but no doubt there were many surprises in store for me.</p>
				<p>How still everything was! Peace! The peace that passeth understanding. After all it had come to me! But, indeed, everything was very still! No bird sang. Surely I was alone in the world! No birds sang. Yes, and all the distant sounds of life had ceased, the lowing of cattle, the barking of dogs.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>Something that was like fear beatified came into my heart. It was all right, I knew; but to be alone! I stood up and met the hot summons of the rising sun, hurrying towards me, as it were, with glad tidings, over the spikes of the barley.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>Blinded, I made a step. My foot struck something hard, and I looked down to discover my revolver, a blue-black thing, like a dead snake at my feet.</p>
				<p>For a moment that puzzled me.</p>
				<p>Then I clean forgot about it. The wonder of the quiet took possession of my soul. Dawn, and no birds singing!</p>
				<p>How beautiful was the world! How beautiful, but how still! I walked slowly through the barley towards a line of elder bushes, wayfaring tree and bramble that made the hedge of the field. I noted as I passed along a dead shrew mouse, as it seemed to me, among the haulms; then a still toad. I was surprised that this did not leap aside from my footfalls, and I stooped and picked it up. Its body was limp like life, but it made no struggle, the brightness of its eye was veiled, it did not move in my hand.</p>
				<p>It seems to me now that I stood holding that lifeless little creature for some time. Then very softly I stooped down and replaced it. I was trembling⁠—trembling with a nameless emotion. I looked with quickened eyes closely among the barley stems, and behold, now everywhere I saw beetles, flies, and little creatures that did not move, lying as they fell when the vapors overcame them; they seemed no more than painted things. Some were novel creatures to me. I was very unfamiliar with natural things. “My God!” I cried; “but is it only I⁠—?”</p>
				<p>And then at my next movement something squealed sharply. I turned about, but I could not see it, only I saw a little stir in a rut and heard the diminishing rustle of the unseen creature’s flight. And at that I turned to my toad again, and its eye moved and it stirred. And presently, with infirm and hesitating gestures, it stretched its limbs and began to crawl away from me.</p>
				<p>But wonder, that gentle sister of fear, had me now. I saw a little way ahead a brown and crimson butterfly perched upon a cornflower. I thought at first it was the breeze that stirred it, and then I saw its wings were quivering. And even as I watched it, it started into life, and spread itself, and fluttered into the air.</p>
				<p>I watched it fly, a turn this way, a turn that, until suddenly it seemed to vanish. And now, life was returning to this thing and that on every side of me, with slow stretchings and bendings, with twitterings, with a little start and stir.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>I came slowly, stepping very carefully because of these drugged, feebly awakening things, through the barley to the hedge. It was a very glorious hedge, so that it held my eyes. It flowed along and interlaced like splendid music. It was rich with lupin, honeysuckle, campions, and ragged robin; bed straw, hops, and wild clematis twined and hung among its branches, and all along its ditch border the starry stitchwort lifted its childish faces, and chorused in lines and masses. Never had I seen such a symphony of note-like flowers and tendrils and leaves. And suddenly in its depths, I heard a chirrup and the whirr of startled wings.</p>
				<p>Nothing was dead, but everything had changed to beauty! And I stood for a time with clean and happy eyes looking at the intricate delicacy before me and marveling how richly God has made his worlds.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>“Tweedle-Tweezle,” a lark had shot the stillness with his shining thread of song; one lark, and then presently another, invisibly in the air, making out of that blue quiet a woven cloth of gold.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>The earth recreated⁠—only by the reiteration of such phrases may I hope to give the intense freshness of that dawn. For a time I was altogether taken up with the beautiful details of being, as regardless of my old life of jealous passion and impatient sorrow as though I was Adam new made. I could tell you now with infinite particularity of the shut flowers that opened as I looked, of tendrils and grass blades, of a blue-tit I picked up very tenderly⁠—never before had I remarked the great delicacy of feathers⁠—that presently disclosed its bright black eye and judged me, and perched, swaying fearlessly, upon my finger, and spread unhurried wings and flew away, and of a great ebullition of tadpoles in the ditch; like all the things that lived beneath the water, they had passed unaltered through the Change. Amid such incidents, I lived those first great moments, losing for a time in the wonder of each little part the mighty wonder of the whole.</p>
				<p>A little path ran between hedge and barley, and along this, leisurely and content and glad, looking at this beautiful thing and that, moving a step and stopping, then moving on again, I came presently to a stile, and deep below it, and overgrown, was a lane.</p>
				<p>And on the worn oak of the stile was a round label, and on the label these words, “Swindells’ G 90 Pills.”</p>
				<p>I sat myself astraddle on the stile, not fully grasping all the implications of these words. But they perplexed me even more than the revolver and my dirty cuff.</p>
				<p>About me now the birds lifted up their little hearts and sang, ever more birds and more.</p>
				<p>I read the label over and over again, and joined it to the fact that I still wore my former clothes, and that my revolver had been lying at my feet. One conclusion stared out at me. This was no new planet, no glorious hereafter such as I had supposed. This beautiful wonderland was the world, the same old world of my rage and death! But at least it was like meeting a familiar house-slut, washed and dignified, dressed in a queen’s robes, worshipful and fine.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>It might be the old world indeed, but something new lay upon all things, a glowing certitude of health and happiness. It might be the old world, but the dust and fury of the old life was certainly done. At least I had no doubt of that.</p>
				<p>I recalled the last phases of my former life, that darkling climax of pursuit and anger and universal darkness and the whirling green vapors of extinction. The comet had struck the earth and made an end to all things; of that too I was assured.</p>
				<p>But afterward?⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>And now?</p>
				<p>The imaginations of my boyhood came back as speculative possibilities. In those days I had believed firmly in the necessary advent of a last day, a great coming out of the sky, trumpetings and fear, the Resurrection, and the Judgment. My roving fancy now suggested to me that this Judgment must have come and passed. That it had passed and in some manner missed me. I was left alone here, in a swept and garnished world (except, of course, for this label of Swindells’) to begin again perhaps.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>No doubt Swindells has got his deserts.</p>
				<p>My mind ran for a time on Swindells, on the imbecile pushfulness of that extinct creature, dealing in rubbish, covering the countryside with lies in order to get⁠—what had he sought?⁠—a silly, ugly, great house, a temper-destroying motorcar, a number of disrespectful, abject servants; thwarted intrigues for a party-fund baronetcy as the crest of his life, perhaps. You cannot imagine the littleness of those former times; their naive, queer absurdities! And for the first time in my existence I thought of these things without bitterness. In the former days I had seen wickedness, I had seen tragedy, but now I saw only the extraordinary foolishness of the old life. The ludicrous side of human wealth and importance turned itself upon me, a shining novelty, poured down upon me like the sunrise, and engulfed me in laughter. Swindells! Swindells, damned! My vision of Judgment became a delightful burlesque. I saw the chuckling Angel sayer with his face veiled, and the corporeal presence of Swindells upheld amidst the laughter of the spheres. “Here’s a thing, and a very pretty thing, and what’s to be done with this very pretty thing?” I saw a soul being drawn from a rotund, substantial-looking body like a whelk from its shell.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>I laughed loudly and long. And behold! even as I laughed the keen point of things accomplished stabbed my mirth, and I was weeping, weeping aloud, convulsed with weeping, and the tears were pouring down my face.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-2-1-3" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">III</h4>
				<p>Everywhere the awakening came with the sunrise. We awakened to the gladness of the morning; we walked dazzled in a light that was joy. Everywhere that was so. It was always morning. It was morning because, until the direct rays of the sun touched it, the changing nitrogen of our atmosphere did not pass into its permanent phase, and the sleepers lay as they had fallen. In its intermediate state the air hung inert, incapable of producing either revival or stupefaction, no longer green, but not yet changed to the gas that now lives in us.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>To everyone, I think, came some parallel to the mental states I have already sought to describe⁠—a wonder, an impression of joyful novelty. There was also very commonly a certain confusion of the intelligence, a difficulty in self-recognition. I remember clearly as I sat on my stile that presently I had the clearest doubts of my own identity and fell into the oddest metaphysical questionings. “If this be I,” I said, “then how is it I am no longer madly seeking Nettie? Nettie is now the remotest thing⁠—and all my wrongs. Why have I suddenly passed out of all that passion? Why does not the thought of Verrall quicken my pulses?”⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>I was only one of many millions who that morning had the same doubts. I suppose one knows one’s self for one’s self when one returns from sleep or insensibility by the familiarity of one’s bodily sensations, and that morning all our most intimate bodily sensations were changed. The intimate chemical processes of life were changed, its nervous metaboly. For the fluctuating, uncertain, passion-darkened thought and feeling of the old time came steady, full-bodied, wholesome processes. Touch was different, sight was different, sound and all the senses were subtler; had it not been that our thought was steadier and fuller, I believe great multitudes of men would have gone mad. But, as it was, we understood. The dominant impression I would convey in this account of the Change is one of enormous release, of a vast substantial exaltation. There was an effect, as it were, of lightheadedness that was also clear-headedness, and the alteration in one’s bodily sensations, instead of producing the mental obfuscation, the loss of identity that was a common mental trouble under former conditions, gave simply a new detachment from the tumid passions and entanglements of the personal life.</p>
				<p>In this story of my bitter, restricted youth that I have been telling you, I have sought constantly to convey the narrowness, the intensity, the confusion, muddle, and dusty heat of the old world. It was quite clear to me, within an hour of my awakening, that all that was, in some mysterious way, over and done. That, too, was the common experience. Men stood up; they took the new air into their lungs⁠—a deep long breath, and the past fell from them; they could forgive, they could disregard, they could attempt.⁠ ⁠… And it was no new thing, no miracle that sets aside the former order of the world. It was a change in material conditions, a change in the atmosphere, that at one bound had released them. Some of them it had released to death.⁠ ⁠… Indeed, man himself had changed not at all. We knew before the Change, the meanest knew, by glowing moments in ourselves and others, by histories and music and beautiful things, by heroic instances and splendid stories, how fine mankind could be, how fine almost any human being could upon occasion be; but the poison in the air, its poverty in all the nobler elements which made such moments rare and remarkable⁠—all that has changed. The air was changed, and the Spirit of Man that had drowsed and slumbered and dreamt dull and evil things, awakened, and stood with wonder-clean eyes, refreshed, looking again on life.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-2-1-4" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h4>
				<p>The miracle of the awakening came to me in solitude, the laughter, and then the tears. Only after some time did I come upon another man. Until I heard his voice calling I did not seem to feel there were any other people in the world. All that seemed past, with all the stresses that were past. I had come out of the individual pit in which my shy egotism had lurked, I had overflowed to all humanity, I had seemed to be all humanity; I had laughed at Swindells as I could have laughed at myself, and this shout that came to me seemed like the coming of an unexpected thought in my own mind. But when it was repeated I answered.</p>
				<p>“I am hurt,” said the voice, and I descended into the lane forthwith, and so came upon Melmount sitting near the ditch with his back to me.</p>
				<p>Some of the incidental sensory impressions of that morning bit so deeply into my mind that I verily believe, when at last I face the greater mysteries that lie beyond this life, when the things of this life fade from me as the mists of the morning fade before the sun, these irrelevant petty details will be the last to leave me, will be the last wisps visible of that attenuating veil. I believe, for instance, I could match the fur upon the collar of his great motoring coat now, could paint the dull red tinge of his big cheek with his fair eyelashes just catching the light and showing beyond. His hat was off, his dome-shaped head, with its smooth hair between red and extreme fairness, was bent forward in scrutiny of his twisted foot. His back seemed enormous. And there was something about the mere massive sight of him that filled me with liking.</p>
				<p>“What’s wrong?” said I.</p>
				<p>“I say,” he said, in his full deliberate tones, straining round to see me and showing a profile, a well-modeled nose, a sensitive, clumsy, big lip, known to every caricaturist in the world, “I’m in a fix. I fell and wrenched my ankle. Where are you?”</p>
				<p>I walked round him and stood looking at his face. I perceived he had his gaiter and sock and boot off, the motor gauntlets had been cast aside, and he was kneading the injured part in an exploratory manner with his thick thumbs.</p>
				<p>“By Jove!” I said, “you’re Melmount!”</p>
				<p>“Melmount!” He thought. “That’s my name,” he said, without looking up.⁠ ⁠… “But it doesn’t affect my ankle.”</p>
				<p>We remained silent for few moments except for a grunt of pain from him.</p>
				<p>“Do you know?” I asked, “what has happened to things?”</p>
				<p>He seemed to complete his diagnosis. “It’s not broken,” he said.</p>
				<p>“Do you know,” I repeated, “what has happened to everything?”</p>
				<p>“No,” he said, looking up at me incuriously for the first time.</p>
				<p>“There’s some difference⁠—”</p>
				<p>“There’s a difference.” He smiled, a smile of unexpected pleasantness, and an interest was coming into his eyes. “I’ve been a little preoccupied with my own internal sensations. I remark an extraordinary brightness about things. Is that it?”</p>
				<p>“That’s part of it. And a queer feeling, a clear-headedness⁠—”</p>
				<p>He surveyed me and meditated gravely. “I woke up,” he said, feeling his way in his memory.</p>
				<p>“And I.”</p>
				<p>“I lost my way⁠—I forget quite how. There was a curious green fog.” He stared at his foot, remembering. “Something to do with a comet. I was by a hedge in the darkness. Tried to run.⁠ ⁠… Then I must have pitched into this lane. Look!” He pointed with his head. “There’s a wooden rail new broken there. I must have stumbled over that out of the field above.” He scrutinized this and concluded. “Yes.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“It was dark,” I said, “and a sort of green gas came out of nothing everywhere. That is the last <em>I</em> remember.”</p>
				<p>“And then you woke up? So did I.⁠ ⁠… In a state of great bewilderment. Certainly there’s something odd in the air. I was⁠—I was rushing along a road in a motorcar, very much excited and preoccupied. I got down⁠—” He held out a triumphant finger. “Ironclads!”</p>
				<p>“<em>Now</em> I’ve got it! We’d strung our fleet from here to Texel. We’d got right across them and the Elbe mined. We’d lost the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Lord Warden</i>. By Jove, yes. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Lord Warden</i>! A battleship that cost two million pounds⁠—and that fool Rigby said it didn’t matter! Eleven hundred men went down.⁠ ⁠… I remember now. We were sweeping up the North Sea like a net, with the North Atlantic fleet waiting at the Faroes for ’em⁠—and not one of ’em had three days’ coal! Now, was that a dream? No! I told a lot of people as much⁠—a meeting was it?⁠—to reassure them. They were warlike but extremely frightened. Queer people⁠—paunchy and bald like gnomes, most of them. Where? Of course! We had it all over⁠—a big dinner⁠—oysters!⁠—Colchester. I’d been there, just to show all this raid scare was nonsense. And I was coming back here.⁠ ⁠… But it doesn’t seem as though that was⁠—recent. I suppose it was. Yes, of course!⁠—it was. I got out of my car at the bottom of the rise with the idea of walking along the cliff path, because everyone said one of their battleships was being chased along the shore. That’s clear! I heard their guns⁠—”</p>
				<p>He reflected. “Queer I should have forgotten! Did <em>you</em> hear any guns?”</p>
				<p>I said I had heard them.</p>
				<p>“Was it last night?”</p>
				<p>“Late last night. One or two in the morning.”</p>
				<p>He leant back on his hand and looked at me, smiling frankly. “Even now,” he said, “it’s odd, but the whole of that seems like a silly dream. Do you think there <em>was</em> a <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Lord Warden</i>? Do you really believe we sank all that machinery⁠—for fun? It was a dream. And yet⁠—it happened.”</p>
				<p>By all the standards of the former time it would have been remarkable that I talked quite easily and freely with so great a man. “Yes,” I said; “that’s it. One feels one has awakened⁠—from something more than that green gas. As though the other things also⁠—weren’t quite real.”</p>
				<p>He knitted his brows and felt the calf of his leg thoughtfully. “I made a speech at Colchester,” he said.</p>
				<p>I thought he was going to add something more about that, but there lingered a habit of reticence in the man that held him for the moment. “It is a very curious thing,” he broke away; “that this pain should be, on the whole, more interesting than disagreeable.”</p>
				<p>“You are in pain?”</p>
				<p>“My ankle is! It’s either broken or badly sprained⁠—I think sprained; it’s very painful to move, but personally I’m not in pain. That sort of general sickness that comes with local injury⁠—not a trace of it!⁠ ⁠…” He mused and remarked, “I was speaking at Colchester, and saying things about the war. I begin to see it better. The reporters⁠—scribble, scribble. Max Sutaine, 1885. Hubbub. Compliments about the oysters. Mm⁠—mm.⁠ ⁠… What was it? About the war? A war that must needs be long and bloody, taking toll from castle and cottage, taking toll!⁠ ⁠… Rhetorical gusto! Was I drunk last night?”</p>
				<p>His eyebrows puckered. He had drawn up his right knee, his elbow rested thereon and his chin on his fist. The deep-set gray eyes beneath his thatch of eyebrow stared at unknown things. “My God!” he murmured, “My God!” with a note of disgust. He made a big brooding figure in the sunlight, he had an effect of more than physical largeness; he made me feel that it became me to wait upon his thinking. I had never met a man of this sort before; I did not know such men existed.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>It is a curious thing, that I cannot now recall any ideas whatever that I had before the Change about the personalities of statesmen, but I doubt if ever in those days I thought of them at all as tangible individual human beings, conceivably of some intellectual complexity. I believe that my impression was a straightforward blend of caricature and newspaper leader. I certainly had no respect for them. And now without servility or any insincerity whatever, as if it were a first-fruit of the Change, I found myself in the presence of a human being towards whom I perceived myself inferior and subordinate, before whom I stood without servility or any insincerity whatever, in an attitude of respect and attention. My inflamed, my rancid egotism⁠—or was it after all only the chances of life?⁠—had never once permitted that before the Change.</p>
				<p>He emerged from his thoughts, still with a faint perplexity in his manner. “That speech I made last night,” he said, “was damned mischievous nonsense, you know. Nothing can alter that. Nothing.⁠ ⁠… No!⁠ ⁠… Little fat gnomes in evening dress⁠—gobbling oysters. Gulp!”</p>
				<p>It was a most natural part of the wonder of that morning that he should adopt this incredible note of frankness, and that it should abate nothing from my respect for him.</p>
				<p>“Yes,” he said, “you are right. It’s all indisputable fact, and I can’t believe it was anything but a dream.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-2-1-5" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">V</h4>
				<p>That memory stands out against the dark past of the world with extraordinary clearness and brightness. The air, I remember, was full of the calling and piping and singing of birds. I have a curious persuasion too that there was a distant happy clamor of pealing bells, but that I am half convinced is a mistake. Nevertheless, there was something in the fresh bite of things, in the dewy newness of sensation that set bells rejoicing in one’s brain. And that big, fair, pensive man sitting on the ground had beauty even in his clumsy pose, as though indeed some great master of strength and humor had made him.</p>
				<p>And⁠—it is so hard now to convey these things⁠—he spoke to me, a stranger, without reservations, carelessly, as men now speak to men. Before those days, not only did we think badly, but what we thought, a thousand shortsighted considerations, dignity, objective discipline, discretion, a hundred kindred aspects of shabbiness of soul, made us muffle before we told it to our fellow-men.</p>
				<p>“It’s all returning now,” he said, and told me half soliloquizingly what was in his mind.</p>
				<p>I wish I could give every word he said to me; he struck out image after image to my nascent intelligence, with swift broken fragments of speech. If I had a precise full memory of that morning I should give it you, verbatim, minutely. But here, save for the little sharp things that stand out, I find only blurred general impressions. Throughout I have to make up again his half-forgotten sentences and speeches, and be content with giving you the general effect. But I can see and hear him now as he said, “The dream got worst at the end. The war⁠—a perfectly horrible business! Horrible! And it was just like a nightmare, you couldn’t do anything to escape from it⁠—everyone was driven!”</p>
				<p>His sense of indiscretion was gone.</p>
				<p>He opened the war out to me⁠—as everyone sees it now. Only that morning it was astonishing. He sat there on the ground, absurdly forgetful of his bare and swollen foot, treating me as the humblest accessory and as altogether an equal, talking out to himself the great obsessions of his mind. “We could have prevented it! Any of us who chose to speak out could have prevented it. A little decent frankness. What was there to prevent us being frank with one another? Their emperor⁠—his position was a pile of ridiculous assumptions, no doubt, but at bottom⁠—he was a sane man.” He touched off the emperor in a few pithy words, the German press, the German people, and our own. He put it as we should put it all now, but with a certain heat as of a man half guilty and wholly resentful. “Their damned little buttoned-up professors!” he cried, incidentally. “Were there ever such men? And ours! Some of us might have taken a firmer line.⁠ ⁠… If a lot of us had taken a firmer line and squashed that nonsense early.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>He lapsed into inaudible whisperings, into silence.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>I stood regarding him, understanding him, learning marvelously from him. It is a fact that for the best part of the morning of the Change I forgot Nettie and Verrall as completely as though they were no more than characters in some novel that I had put aside to finish at my leisure, in order that I might talk to this man.</p>
				<p>“Eh, well,” he said, waking startlingly from his thoughts. “Here we are awakened! The thing can’t go on now; all this must end. How it ever began⁠—! My dear boy, how did all those things ever begin? I feel like a new Adam.⁠ ⁠… Do you think this has happened⁠—generally? Or shall we find all these gnomes and things?⁠ ⁠… Who cares?”</p>
				<p>He made as if to rise, and remembered his ankle. He suggested I should help him as far as his bungalow. There seemed nothing strange to either of us that he should requisition my services or that I should cheerfully obey. I helped him bandage his ankle, and we set out, I his crutch, the two of us making up a sort of limping quadruped, along the winding lane toward the cliffs and the sea.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-2-1-6" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h4>
				<p>His bungalow beyond the golf links was, perhaps, a mile and a quarter from the lane. We went down to the beach margin and along the pallid wave-smoothed sands, and we got along by making a swaying, hopping, tripod dance forward until I began to give under him, and then, as soon as we could, sitting down. His ankle was, in fact, broken, and he could not put it to the ground without exquisite pain. So that it took us nearly two hours to get to the house, and it would have taken longer if his butler-valet had not come out to assist me. They had found motorcar and chauffeur smashed and still at the bend of the road near the house, and had been on that side looking for Melmount, or they would have seen us before.</p>
				<p>For most of that time we were sitting now on turf, now on a chalk boulder, now on a timber groin, and talking one to the other, with the frankness proper to the intercourse of men of good intent, without reservations or aggressions, in the common, open fashion of contemporary intercourse today, but which then, nevertheless, was the rarest and strangest thing in the world. He for the most part talked, but at some shape of a question I told him⁠—as plainly as I could tell of passions that had for a time become incomprehensible to me⁠—of my murderous pursuit of Nettie and her lover, and how the green vapors overcame me. He watched me with grave eyes and nodded understandingly, and afterwards he asked me brief penetrating questions about my education, my upbringing, my work. There was a deliberation in his manner, brief full pauses, that had in them no element of delay.</p>
				<p>“Yes,” he said, “yes⁠—of course. What a fool I have been!” and said no more until we had made another of our tripod struggles along the beach. At first I did not see the connection of my story with that self-accusation.</p>
				<p>“Suppose,” he said, panting on the groin, “there had been such a thing as a statesman!⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>He turned to me. “If one had decided all this muddle shall end! If one had taken it, as an artist takes his clay, as a man who builds takes site and stone, and made⁠—” He flung out his big broad hand at the glories of sky and sea, and drew a deep breath, “something to fit that setting.”</p>
				<p>He added in explanation, “Then there wouldn’t have been such stories as yours at all, you know.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“Tell me more about it,” he said, “tell me all about yourself. I feel all these things have passed away, all these things are to be changed forever.⁠ ⁠… You won’t be what you have been from this time forth. All the things you have done⁠—don’t matter now. To us, at any rate, they don’t matter at all. We have met, who were separated in that darkness behind us. Tell me.</p>
				<p>“Yes,” he said; and I told my story straight and as frankly as I have told it to you. “And there, where those little skerries of weed rock run out to the ebb, beyond the headland, is Bungalow village. What did you do with your pistol?”</p>
				<p>“I left it lying there⁠—among the barley.”</p>
				<p>He glanced at me from under his light eyelashes. “If others feel like you and I,” he said, “there’ll be a lot of pistols left among the barley today.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>So we talked, I and that great, strong man, with the love of brothers so plain between us it needed not a word. Our souls went out to one another in stark good faith; never before had I had anything but a guarded watchfulness for any fellow-man. Still I see him, upon that wild desolate beach of the ebb tide, I see him leaning against the shelly buttress of a groin, looking down at the poor drowned sailor whose body we presently found. For we found a newly drowned man who had just chanced to miss this great dawn in which we rejoiced. We found him lying in a pool of water, among brown weeds in the dark shadow of the timberings. You must not overrate the horrors of the former days; in those days it was scarcely more common to see death in England than it would be today. This dead man was a sailor from the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Rother Adler</i>, the great German battleship that⁠—had we but known it⁠—lay not four miles away along the coast amidst ploughed-up mountains of chalk ooze, a torn and battered mass of machinery, wholly submerged at high water, and holding in its interstices nine hundred drowned brave men, all strong and skilful, all once capable of doing fine things.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>I remember that poor boy very vividly. He had been drowned during the anaesthesia of the green gas, his fair young face was quiet and calm, but the skin of his chest had been crinkled by scalding water and his right arm was bent queerly back. Even to this needless death and all its tale of cruelty, beauty and dignity had come. Everything flowed together to significance as we stood there, I, the ill-clad, cheaply equipped proletarian, and Melmount in his great fur-trimmed coat⁠—he was hot with walking but he had not thought to remove it⁠—leaning upon the clumsy groins and pitying this poor victim of the war he had helped to make. “Poor lad!” he said, “poor lad! A child we blunderers sent to death! Do look at the quiet beauty of that face, that body⁠—to be flung aside like this!”</p>
				<p>(I remember that near this dead man’s hand a stranded starfish writhed its slowly feeling limbs, struggling back toward the sea. It left grooved traces in the sand.)</p>
				<p>“There must be no more of this,” panted Melmount, leaning on my shoulder, “no more of this.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>But most I recall Melmount as he talked a little later, sitting upon a great chalk boulder with the sunlight on his big, perspiration-dewed face. He made his resolves. “We must end war,” he said, in that full whisper of his; “it is stupidity. With so many people able to read and think⁠—even as it is⁠—there is no need of anything of the sort. Gods! What have we rulers been at?⁠ ⁠… Drowsing like people in a stifling room, too dull and sleepy and too base toward each other for anyone to get up and open the window. What haven’t we been at?”</p>
				<p>A great powerful figure he sits there still in my memory, perplexed and astonished at himself and all things. “We must change all this,” he repeated, and threw out his broad hands in a powerful gesture against the sea and sky. “We have done so weakly⁠—Heaven alone knows why!” I can see him now, queer giant that he looked on that dawnlit beach of splendor, the sea birds flying about us and that crumpled death hard by, no bad symbol in his clumsiness and needless heat of the unawakened powers of the former time. I remember it as an integral part of that picture that far away across the sandy stretches one of those white estate boards I have described, stuck up a little askew amidst the yellow-green turf upon the crest of the low cliffs.</p>
				<p>He talked with a sort of wonder of the former things. “Has it ever dawned upon you to imagine the pettiness⁠—the pettiness!⁠—of every soul concerned in a declaration of war?” he asked. He went on, as though speech was necessary to make it credible, to describe Laycock, who first gave the horror words at the cabinet council, “an undersized Oxford prig with a tenoring voice and a garbage of Greek⁠—the sort of little fool who is brought up on the admiration of his elder sisters.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>“All the time almost,” he said, “I was watching him⁠—thinking what an ass he was to be trusted with men’s lives.⁠ ⁠… I might have done better to have thought that of myself. I was doing nothing to prevent it all! The damned little imbecile was up to his neck in the drama of the thing, he liked to trumpet it out, he goggled round at us. ‘Then it is war!’ he said. Richover shrugged his shoulders. I made some slight protest and gave in.⁠ ⁠… Afterward I dreamt of him.</p>
				<p>“What a lot we were! All a little scared at ourselves⁠—all, as it were, instrumental.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>“And it’s fools like that lead to things like this!” He jerked his head at that dead man near by us.</p>
				<p>“It will be interesting to know what has happened to the world.⁠ ⁠… This green vapor⁠—queer stuff. But I know what has happened to me. It’s Conversion. I’ve always known.⁠ ⁠… But this is being a fool. Talk! I’m going to stop it.”</p>
				<p>He motioned to rise with his clumsy outstretched hands.</p>
				<p>“Stop what?” said I, stepping forward instinctively to help him.</p>
				<p>“War,” he said in his great whisper, putting his big hand on my shoulder but making no further attempt to arise, “I’m going to put an end to war⁠—to any sort of war! And all these things that must end. The world is beautiful, life is great and splendid, we had only to lift up our eyes and see. Think of the glories through which we have been driving, like a herd of swine in a garden place. The color in life⁠—the sounds⁠—the shapes! We have had our jealousies, our quarrels, our ticklish rights, our invincible prejudices, our vulgar enterprise and sluggish timidities, we have chattered and pecked one another and fouled the world⁠—like daws in the temple, like unclean birds in the holy place of God. All my life has been foolishness and pettiness, gross pleasures and mean discretions⁠—all. I am a meagre dark thing in this morning’s glow, a penitence, a shame! And, but for God’s mercy, I might have died this night⁠—like that poor lad there⁠—amidst the squalor of my sins! No more of this! No more of this!⁠—whether the whole world has changed or no, matters nothing. <em>We two have seen this dawn!</em>⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>He paused.</p>
				<p>“I will arise and go unto my Father,” he began presently, “and will say unto Him⁠—”</p>
				<p>His voice died away in an inaudible whisper. His hand tightened painfully on my shoulder and he rose.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
